:author: Mathias
:tags: benchmarking
:index-paragraphs: 2
:show-post-structure: no

spray 1.0-M8 / 1.1-M8 / 1.2-M8 released
=======================================

Dear sprayers,

we -- the *spray* team -- are happy and proud to finally be able to announce the release of the much too long awaited
**M8 milestone** of *spray* 1.0 / 1.1 / 1.2.

A lot has happened in and around the *spray* codebase since we released M7 in December, with the most notable change
probably being the move onto the new Akka I/O layer that was jointly developed with the Akka team in the last months
in order to provide an even better "Scala-all-the-way-through" actor-based I/O foundation, not just for HTTP.
This new I/O layer will be officially released with Akka 2.2 (the first RC of which is already at this time), but for
everyone who is not yet willing or able to upgrade from Akka 2.0 or 2.1 we provide a one-to-one backport of the new
I/O abstraction with *spray-io* 1.0/1.1-M8.

But also on top of the raw I/O layer this milestone brings a lot of good stuff for your *spray* applications,
for example:

- A completely new and even faster implementation of our *spray-can* HTTP parser. The work in this area was the basis
  for *spray's* success in the latest round of the `techempower benchmark`_, so upgrading to M8 should give your
  HTTP stack a nice performance boost.

- Fully rewritten :ref:`HTTP Client APIs`, which improve upon the experiences from earlier releases and give you the
  most powerful and flexible client-side HTTP abstractions available with *spray* to date.

- Much improved HTTP model in :ref:`spray-http`, with things like complete serializability, a very fast and fully
  `RFC 3986`_-compliant URI parser as well as better and more efficient rendering abstractions.

The full list of changes, fixes and additions is too long for us to properly compile it, please check out the
:ref:`Changelog` for more details.

Since this milestone is a triple release, here are the Scala and Akka versions that are targeted by the different
artifacts (see also the :ref:`Current Versions` chapter):

.. rst-class:: table table-striped

===============  =============  ============
*spray* version  Scala version  Akka version
===============  =============  ============
1.0-M8           Scala 2.9.x    Akka 2.0.x
1.1-M8           Scala 2.10.x   Akka 2.1.x
1.2-M8           Scala 2.10.x   Akka 2.2.x
===============  =============  ============

The development statistics for 1.1-M8 (since 1.1-M7):

- 1.081 files changed
- 21.628 insertions
- 15.363 deletions
- 18 committers

As the name implies this release is still only a milestone until the 1.0/1.1/1.2 finals, but it will be the last one.
In the coming weeks we a planning on burning through the `open tickets`_ and provide you with the first release
candidate as soon as we can.

Until then we are, as always, very much looking forward to your feedback!

Happy spraying!

| Cheers,
| Mathias

.. _techempower benchmark: /blog/2013-05-24-benchmarking-spray/
.. _RFC 3986: http://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc3986
.. _open tickets: https://github.com/spray/spray/issues?state=open